# MathGAP
MathGAP can generate new math word problems, including the reasoning traces needed to solve them. You are in complete control over the structure of your problems and the operations involved in solving them.

## Supported Features
- generating new math word problems
    - including reasoning traces
- control over the proof-tree required to solve each math word problem
    - specify the set of inference rules / logical deductions that can be part of the tree / solution
    - specify the width or depth of the proof-tree
- reordering of the problem formulation
- constrained initialization
    - specify the range of numbers that can occur in the math word problem
    - specify which agents, entities etc to use
- extendable with: 
    - custom inference rules
    - custom templates (ways of expressing in natural language)
    - other languages
- tracking the origin of each character when rendered as natural language

## Using MathGAP
```
conda create -n mathgap python=3.10
conda activate mathgap
pip install -e mathgap
```

Generate a nonlinear problem and its solution for a tree of a certain depth:
```
cd mathgap
python demo_generation.py example-nonlinear --depth 3 --graph
```

See [MathGAP: Out-of-Distribution Evaluation on Problems with Arbitrarily Complex Proofs](experiments/opedal24_ood_eval/Readme.md) for a concrete application of the MathGAP pipeline.

## How it works
In a nutshell, MathGAP uses (reverse) inference rules (describing logical deductions such as: If Alice has 5 apples and Bob has 3 more apples than Alice, then Bob has 8 apples), to create a proof tree. The nodes of the tree are logical forms (e.g. Alice has 5 apples). The axioms of this tree constitute the problem formulation (e.g. Alice has 5 apples. Bob has 3 more apples than Alice), whereas the root usually corresponds to the question (e.g. How many apples does Bob have?). Multiple orderings of axioms yield the same problem, we support sampling from a subset of them.
Note, that the tree does not use concrete names (e.g. Alice) but rather properties (e.g. agent1), which are later instantiated from a list of possible values (e.g. names). Additionally, each logical form or inference step, can be rendered with multiple templates (e.g. Bob has 3 more apples than Alice vs. Alice has 3 apples less than Bob). The rendering process allows tracking of metadata (i.e. which character originated from which property).

This is an extended version of MathGAP but for a description of the initial version, see here: Opedal, A., Shirakami, H., Schölkopf, B., Saparov, A., & Sachan, M. (2024). MathGAP: Out-of-Distribution Evaluation on Problems with Arbitrarily Complex Proofs. arXiv [Cs.LG]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13502

## Extending MathGAP
### Logical Forms
If you want to add a new logical form, you can:
1. Create the new logical form in mathgap/mathgap/logicalforms. For larger logical forms, the boilerplate code can be automatically generated by using mathgap/mathgap/logicalforms/_gen_util.py. You will have to implement some abstract methods yourself though.
2. Implement the rendering of your new logical form (as text, latex etc)
3. Create new templates for the logical form in mathgap/mathgap/data/templates and register them in the template-catalog in mathgap/mathgap/data/util.py. Depending on how you plan to use the logical form, you need to specify different types of templates.
    - statements: For lfs that can occur as leaf-nodes (or answers if you intend to render those)
    - conclusions: For lfs that can occur as inner nodes of a proof-tree. Only if you want to render reasoning traces though. 
    - questions: For lfs that can be asked for (usually either the root-node of the tree or inner nodes)
4. Create new inference rules that introduce the logicalform as a premise or conclusion.
5. If your new logical form can be at the root of a proof-tree, you want to extend your generator.

### Inference Rules
You can create a new inference rule in mathgap/mathgap/trees/rules/ by:
1. Create a new file named after the types of the premises (e.g. contcont.py) in a folder named after the type of the conclusion (e.g. comp). In this file, create a class called after the premises and conclusion (e.g. ContContComp), which extends from InferenceRule.
2. Define metadata like: type of conclusion, types of premises, variable-times, parametrization and then implement all methods. 
3. Implement the inference rule abstract methods (if the variable-times do not differ between premise/conclusion, you can use the default implementation)
NOTE: if your rule introduces a write (e.g. Container) to a variable that is not a new one, then you want to validate whether no other write occurs to the same variable-key at the same time already in is_reverse_applicable. Also, the order of the premises should respect the time (e.g. in ContTransferCont the Cont needs to be the first premise)
4. Add the inference rule to the list of rules that your generator uses

### Instantiators
If you want to enforce new constraints when instantiating properties (e.g. if there should be no subtractions with a carry), then you can simply add a new [Instantiator](mathgap/mathgap/instantiate/instantiators.py) and use it to instantiate your properties.

### Instantiation Values
For the respective property type, simply add a new version in mathgap/mathgap/data and load your new version instead of the default one.

### Templates
Look at the existing templates in mathgap/mathgap/data/templates to see how it's done.
Key concepts to know:
- templates can have one of three types: statement, question, conclusion
- each template consists of parts
- partials are named partial templates that can replace parts of templates (this is helpful to reduce complexity, e.g. we can have either entity, attribute entity etc, depending on which properties are available in the logical form)
- parts can be resolved either through: 
    - properties (the corresponding instantiation of the property will be looked up from the logical form)
    - partials (all possible partials under the given name can be rendererd instead of this part)
    - expressions (the instantiated expression is looked up and rendered up to some depth, e.g. 5 + 10 if depth = 1)
    - lists of properties (in this case you can specify which word will be used to join them, e.g. "Alice, Bob and Charlie")
- for groups of templates, conditions can be specified, which need to hold in order for the template to be eligible to render a logical form of this type. conditions include: And, Equality etc (you can also add custom ones, see [conditions.py](mathgap/mathgap/natlang/templates/condition.py)). Conditions can reference the logical form but also the tree (e.g. through queries: "condition": { "type": "equality", "property": "sender", "query": "conclusion.agent" }, this would compare the property sender of the logical form with the agent of the conclusion logical form).

### Generation
There's a default [generator](mathgap/mathgap/trees/generators/general.py) to generate general non-linear proof trees. You can specify the stopping criteria (e.g. depth 3) as well as the inference rules that are used. Depending on the set of inference rules you use, you can also generate linear proof trees.
If you want a specific tree structure, you can either implement a custom [rule-sampling-policy](mathgap/mathgap/trees/generators/policies/rulesamplingpolicy.py) or hardcode a new [generator](mathgap/mathgap/trees/generators/generator.py).




## Issues
- comparison after transfer should start with "Now,"
    Ava has 9 green vases. Then, Jacob got 4 green vases from Ava. Ava has 9 green vases less than Isabella. How many green vases does Isabella have?
- enforce consistency between problem formulation and reasoning trace


## Ideas For Extending Mathworld
- list all available parametrizations of a inference-rule for fully automatic generation
- singular vs plural entities
- countable vs uncountable entities (i.e. A has less experience than B. A has fewer oranges than B.)
    - this would require template variants depending on the instantiation
- "recall that," in reasoning traces whenever fact is us used again but hasn't been mentioned in a while
    - could add this as a new template type
- introduce variables / non-human-agents (i.e. "the difference between x and y" "... is equal to the number of apples that Alice has.")
- might be smart to have an option to convert the proof-tree to a networkx or graph structure directly bc it allows us to compute metrics on graph
- not engouh attributes for large problem structures (maybe only use a few of them instead of for)
- other constraints like "no carry" on instantiations of numbers
- find valid instantiations faster for larger depth/width => constrained gradient descent on inputs to satisfy or numerical solver 
    - how does this affect the distribution over instantiations? do we even need the numbers to be iid? => we don't, as long as it doesn't always end up in the same position
    - some observations:
        - for linear or convex constraints we could use solver and then use hit-and-run to approximate iid
        - for non-linear (with potentially separated sub-regions):
            - rejection sampling (sample from convex-overapproximation and reject those outside the box)
            - simulated annleaing (hit-and-run like but allow exploration outside of constraints, gradually lower temperature)
- more variations through verbal cues:
    - https://www.therouttymathteacher.com/keywords-for-math-word-problems/
    - https://jillianstarrteaching.com/addition-and-subtraction-word-problems/